罗素论忍受单调生活的能力

　　罗素论“忍受单调生活的能力”（The capacity to endure a more or less monotonous life）：“忍受烦闷的能耐，对于幸福生活是必要的，是应该教给青年人的许多事情之一。”（A certain power of enduring boredom is therefore essential to a happy life，and is one of the things that might to be taught to the young．）“太多的旅行、太多复杂的印象，不适宜于青年人，徒然使他们长大起来不耐寂寞，殊不知唯寂寞才能生产果实。”（Too much travel，too much variety of impressions， are not good for the young, and cause them as they grow up to become incaPable of enduring fruitful monotony．）“安静的生活是大人物的特征，他们的喜乐也不是外人心目中认为兴奋的那一种。一切伟大的成就必须历久不懈的工作，其精神贯注与艰难的程度，使人再没有余力去应付狂热的娱乐。”（Altogether it will be found that a quiet life is characteristic of great men，and that their pleasures have not been of the sort that would look exciting to the outward eye．No great achievement is possible without persistent work，so absorbing and no difficult that little energy is left over for the more strenuous kinds of amusement．）“一切伟大的生活含有沉闷的努力。”（All great lives have contained uninteresting stretches．）“一个男孩子或青年人，若抱着严肃而有建设性的目标，一定甘心情愿的忍受大量的烦闷，要是必须的话。但若过着一种心思散漫、纵情逸乐的生活，一个青年人的头脑里就难于孕育有建设性的目标；因为在此情形中，他的念头所贯注的将是未来的欢娱，而非遥远的成就。为了这些缘故，不能忍受烦闷的一代，定是人物渺小的一代。” （A boy or young man who has some serious constructive Purpose will endure voluntarily a great deal of boredom if he finds that it is necessary by the way．But constructive purpose do not easily form themselves in a boy's mind if he is living a life of distractions and dissipations, for in that case his thoughts will always be directed forwards the next pleasure rather than towards the distant achievetment．For all these reasons a generation that cannot endure boredom will be a generation of little men．）“为了逃避那富有建设性的烦闷，他们反而堕入另一种更可怕的烦闷。幸福的生活，大半有赖于恬静，因为唯有在恬静的空气中，真正的欢乐才能常住。”（In flying from the fructifying kind of boredom, they fall a prey to the other far worse kind. A happy life must be a great extent a quiet life , for it is only in an atmosphere of quiet that ture joy can live.）（1957年6月5日）

    李敖影音E书QQ群578505007：不自由的自由（wjm_tcy）制作！

    李敖影音E书②群：437813363

    李敖数字博物馆（爱华山樱创建）：www.leeaoweb.com

    李敖资源下载站（古法创建）：leeao.net

    油管/抖音/西瓜/小红书/哔哩哔哩/今日头条：李敖档案馆

